Okay, so as Bill said, I'm going to be talking about profvis and profiling tools for
faster R code. So thanks already for coming, I just want to say that. So one,
so here's a question that probably comes up a lot if you work with R a lot, which
is how do I make my R code faster? And that naturally leads to another question
which is why is my R code slow? And my strategy for this talk is I'm going to
walk you through a couple examples and show you some of the tools, some of the
tools that can help you diagnose these problems and and speed up your code and
hopefully we'll also learn a bit about a few particular things in R that
might be slow and surprisingly slow and ways to speed it up. Okay, so I'm just
going to start with this example here. Let's say you've got you've got a data
frame that has 400,000 rows and 150 columns and I'm just generating some
random data here with our norm and I you know this this data is I picked it
because it's a good size for this demonstration so it's there's nothing
special about this it's just it's just a good size and good timing for this for
demonstrations here. Okay, so one thing you might do is well I'll write a
function that will normalize the column so let's say I want to take each of
these 150 columns and make it so that the mean of that column is zero and so I
take, sorry, so the mean of the column is zero so I take the
original data for each column and then I find the mean of that and then subtract
that mean from from each column so so I've got this function norm calls and
what it does is it takes it takes the mean of every column by using the apply
function like this and and then it subtracts the mean that I calculated
from each column and then returns the resulting data frame so so this is just
my you know my first a first pass attempt at normalizing normalizing these
columns. Okay, so then after I define this function then I would say norm calls
data on the data that I've generated. Okay, so let's let's try that. So I've
got my code here this is the same code that you saw before first I'll generate
the data, this takes a few seconds,
maybe more of a few seconds, but fortunately we don't have to do this
part once. Okay, so it's done, find my function, oops, sorry, I typed an extra
character there accidentally, sorry about that, so to find my function,
oh I'm sorry, okay, I just trying to print out the data right now and that there's
a lot of it so it's very slow so let me just try to stop this and restart my R
session. Okay, all right, so starting over let's create the data,
okay, and then we'll define our function norm calls and then we'll run
the function and this time we'll wrap it in invisible so it doesn't try to print
it out because that is very slow. So if you saw that took a few
seconds to run that. Again, I'll do it again so you can see it takes a few
seconds, it's sitting there and then returns to the console. Okay, so that's,
you know, this is a, it takes a few seconds and if we want to take a closer
look at how to, the amount of time that it takes, sort of the first pass thing
that you might do is just run system.time, so you have all the same code
and you wrap it in system.time and this tells you how long it takes to run the
code inside of it. All right, so let's try that, I have it right here and the
total time that took was 2.6 seconds. Okay, so if you're trying to figure out
what, you know, parts of your code are slow or how long things are taking, this
is the first thing that you might do is just to see how long does it take,
but then after that, you know, typically you're left to your own devices and you
have to, you have to take a look at your code and think about what, sort of take
guesses at what parts are slow and what parts are not slow. So, and that
can require, you know, to get an accurate idea of what the parts that are
expensive, that takes a lot of, that can take a lot of experience and sometimes
even, you know, what you think is slow is not, that's not the right,
it's not actually slow. So in order to help out and figure out what parts are
slow, so you can speed them up, you've got, you can use profiling tools. So
R has a built-in profiler, it's a sampling profiler and what it does is
it will tell you what the R process is doing over time. So to use it, it's
really simple, you just say R prof, then you run your code and you say R prof null
and that stops the profiler. So what happens is, is this is, let's say this is
time along the x-axis here, the R process does a lot of computation, it does a lot
of computation and then periodically every, I believe the default is 20
milliseconds, every 20 milliseconds the profiler stops the R process and it
queries it and says what function are you in right now and our code is
very simple so it'll be in the norm calls function and then it records that,
it saves that and then it goes back and the R process does all sorts of
computation here, lots of computations, it's and then it gets stopped again by
the profiler and again it's in the norm calls function so it writes that, it
saves that again and it keeps going, it does this every 20 milliseconds until
it's done. So now obviously in this case, if this is all that it recorded, this is
not particularly helpful information, we know that we're in the norm calls
function all the way in this entire time here, but it actually records
more information than that. What it does is it records these, not just the sort of
the outermost function that's being called, which was norm calls, it will also
record other functions in the call, what's called the call stack. So norm
calls, it calls apply, all right, so this is our norm calls here, this is our
function definition and that it first called apply and apply it turns out will
call as.matrix, as.matrix.dataframe on list, so this is the call stack and
then these are all R functions and then at the top of the call stack usually
typically this, the functions that are at the top of this will call it to
C code, which the profiler does not record and does not give any
insight into. So that's what happened, what might happen at the first
sample and maybe the second sample, the third sample there's something
different that happens like norm calls, calls apply, so apply then calls mean,
which calls mean.default and so on, and then eventually after it does all
the apply stuff then it will call the minus function because minus, you know,
these operators in R are all functions. So this is the
information that the sampling profiler will record. Now the data that comes out
of our prof, the built-in R profiler is, it's a little bit, it takes some
practice and some expertise to work with. So we have a tool, oops, oh yes,
actually I should, oops, let's go back to here. One important thing to remember is
that the, if this is like the full complexity of all the stuff that you're,
that the computer is doing and all the processing that it's doing, this is what
the profiler is going to tell you. It's a very low resolution view of what the
computer is doing, but that's actually, but that's okay because, you know, for this
for this sort of thing we're trying to, you know, we're trying to find the large
expensive things, large slow expensive things and speed them up. So we don't
need to look at all the fine detail typically to, in order to make
improvements. We can see the large features here like the continents and
the oceans and that's, you know, that's sort of like those are the large
things that we need to look at for speeding up our code. Okay, so as I was
saying, the data that comes out of the profiler and the built-in tools for
R, they do take some practice and expertise to use. So I've worked on this
package called profiz which makes it a lot easier to interact with and
interpret the profiling information that gets recorded. So to use it,
you'd say install.packages profiz and then library profiz and then you
just take your code and the same code and you wrap it in profiz, similar
to how we ran, we used system.time before, but this time we just use profiz.
Okay, so I'll show you what happens if we do that. We've got this, this is our code
here, profiz there, so let's run it and I'm running this from within RStudio and
when you're in RStudio, it just pops up in this panel right here. If you're
running it outside of RStudio, it'll come up in a web browser and the
interactions will be exactly the same. So okay, so there's two parts here that
show up in the beginning. There's the, this is the code here, right, this is all
the code that we ran and then on the bottom there's a flame graph. So the code
is pretty self-explanatory, well the code itself is self-explanatory. On the right
there's two little graphs for each line of code that are useful. So the first is
that, well the one that's most important is the time. So there's about 1700
milliseconds spent on this line of code and about 280 milliseconds spent on this
line of code and as you can see, so in this line of code there is about 2,000
milliseconds. Now it actually turns out that this 2010 is the sum of these two
lines of code. So it spent time in this line of code but this line of code all
called out to this function and so it's ended up spending time within these
these other two lines of code as well. So that's the time column. The
memory column shows how much memory was allocated and deallocated within each
line of code. So in the call to this norm calls function there is 2,000
megabytes of memory allocated and 900 megabytes deallocated. I'll talk a little
bit more about that in a bit. Okay so that's the code and
there's this corresponding thing in the bottom called a flame graph. This is
really important. So in the flame graph on the x-axis is time. So this is
at the beginning when we started and it goes across over time as time was
progressing and this is where it ended. So all of the time was all the time was
spent in the norm calls function and norm calls called out to apply which we
saw before in that diagram that I showed you and apply called as.matrix
which called you know a bunch of other functions as.matrix.dataframe and
unlist. Anyway after it finished doing after apply finishes doing as.matrix
and it calls aperm and then it calls this function which happens to be the
function we passed in which is the mean function and and then after apply
finished then it the minus function was called the minus function and this whole
thing took about about two seconds.
So there is this well there's this GC thing which is a garbage collection
event this is this is when R allocates a lot of memory and then and then it when
it decides it needs to free up some of the memory that it had previously
allocated it does a garbage collection which stops everything all the processing
and it just spends time clearing up memory and that's where that's where
the memory deallocations happen so if that minus 903 megabytes that was the
garbage collection event right there. Okay so now if we talk about this code
a little talk about the code a little bit and what's expensive here so the
apply function first it converts our data frame to a matrix and then it calls
a perm on it which actually it's it's essentially transposing the matrix and
so it does all of that work that takes you know almost what 800 milliseconds
and that's just to transform the data into a form before it can start
doing the actual work which is taking the mean of each column. All right so
that's that seems like that seems kind of like kind of a waste so let's you
know let's if we think about some other ways of getting the means of columns
that might be helpful. So here's one way that we can do it we can we can just
find some other ways of doing this and then run prof is on them so here's four
ways of doing it so the first was to apply the mean function using the apply
function the next is to do column means there is a built-in function in R for
taking column means and it seems like that should be pretty fast right if
there's a specialized function for that and and there's two other ways that
we're going to do here using L apply and V apply so it turns out that this is
using the fact that data frames in R implemented as lists so a data frame is
actually a list of vectors each column is one of those vectors so we can apply
L apply the mean for all of those columns just by by calling it like this
and the V apply does basically the same thing except it enforces a return type
which might be useful but they're essentially the same thing so if we run
this code let's go back to here we run it then this will give us the ability to
compare these four different ways of getting means so the first is a apply we
knew this was slow this time it's took about 1700 milliseconds the next way
that we we tried was call means which is also it's much faster it's about four
times faster but it's not the fastest way to do it which may be a little bit
surprising and then L apply and V apply are both very fast so these are both
over each of these is over ten times faster than our original method of doing
it now again this profiler gives us some useful information not just it tells us
not just that you know call means is slower but it also gives us some insight
into why well oh yes and by the way you can zoom in here with this thing graph
you want a closer look so the reason that it's slower is because again call
means like the apply function converts the data to a matrix first and it
actually you know if you read the documentation for call means it says
that that's what it's for but it is for matrix data but if you give it a data
frame it will of course it for matrix and that's that turns out to be an
expensive operation and then after that this little empty block here this is
where it's calling out to C code to actually take the means and this is then
it's very fast but I will plan V apply or you know they don't have that that
matrix conversion step and so they're they're overall much faster than
calling call means or applying okay so so then we can go back and have a more
optimized version of the code in this example I used V apply just because it's
a little bit more convenient to work with the the data that comes out of it
but it's could have used L apply here as well so we just make a copy of the data
take the means of each column and then we would modify that data frame by
subtracting the means all right so let's let's take a quick look at that
okay so so this is our original thing we can see you know we worked on the most
expensive the the slowest part of the code first which is this line and now
that part is much faster this is the corresponding part in our new code and
in this part this if now it's this line that's slower so so there's actually
some room for improvement here but this is already you know this is much much
faster than our original code our original originally it took let's see
how long was it about two seconds to run to run a like to take a do the
normalizing and now it's taking us about 400 milliseconds so it's about five times
faster just by doing that one optimization but again there's a room
for a little bit more improvement here but I'm not going to go into depth about
that okay so I want to show a second example this is this is something that
actually this is a problem that came up while I was working on profits and
haven't working on a process in the data so the the data that comes out of the
that's recorded by the profiler looks like this it's actually good stage for a
text file and this is a each line of text represents one sample one moment in
time and this is the call stack so it's actually in the order so applies at the
bottom of the call stack and then as a matrix as I made it for matrix that data
frame and then unlist and the next samples like that and then you know a
sample further down the line might only have might be calling apply and then a
perm etc etc and there's about 750 lines of this and we need this to be
transformed into a data frame that looks like this where each each row in the
data frame is represents one of these samples and it says and it records the
original row that it came in which is essentially the time which time step it
was at and then the column which was uh well it's in reversed order here but this
is this is essentially the depth in the call stack and then the label so the way
it does this is it takes each line converts it to a data frame and then
into a small data frame like this this you know this four row data frame each
line gets turned a data frame and then it sticks all those little data frames
together that's that's how it how it did it originally and I'll just I'm just
going to walk through this code real quick and you can look at some of the
things that might seem like they're slow all right so first we read in the
read in the the text file we create a list to store all this all those those
data frames that we have little data frames that we create and then for each
line we process the line of text so first we save the line and variable we
split up the line on spaces then we create a data frame from that and then
we serve a data frame in the list and then we just loop over and keep doing
this for each line and then at the end we combine all these data frames
together by you calling do a call and our bind okay so let's just run this
code real quick and let's see this is okay so it takes about 400 milliseconds
here and we can see what's expensive so well let's actually let's take a look
first why don't we take a look at some of the things that seem like they should
that they might be expensive so so these are these are typical things that typical
things that everyone in our community well not everyone but people in our
community are rules of thumb that are for things that are slow so first you
know this list that I have here it's not pre-allocated I'm using a for loop which
is you know people tend to say to avoid for loops because they can be slow and
then I'm growing this list in the loop so because I did not pre allocate the
list every time I add something to it it has to allocate a whole new list so
these are things that seem like they should be expensive but if we take a
look at the the actual profiling result here that's not necessarily the case of
expensive so again took about 40 milliseconds to do all this and most of
the time as we can see was spent here creating data frame there's some time
spent splitting up the string but more much more time spent creating the data
frames and at the end putting the data frames together with the do call and
our bind so so that's that's interesting it's you know actually storing the data
and growing this list in the loop that was actually not very expensive it looks
like that took about 20 milliseconds total so it's that's a negligible amount
of time compared to all other stuff that's that's happening so so yeah so
let's just goes to show that sometimes it's counterintuitive what the expensive
parts are creating data frames it turns out is expensive in R so now I won't go
into detail about this but the way that you can solve this or that I solve this
particular problem was instead of creating a data frame for each
iteration of the loop is to put the data in a list because that's
essentially what a data frame is it just it's it's essentially a list but a data
frame enforces a few a few things like each of the vectors needs to be the same
length but if we're careful we can just use a list instead and then I create a
data frame at the end by calling data dot frame and then extracting out each
of these columns from the from the list of lists that I have but again I won't
go into detail about this but I just wanted to show you that now that we
since we know what the actual expensive parts are here instead of spending time
trying to optimize the wrong thing like converting it from a for loop to you
know I'll apply or something like that it's been time fixing the things that
are actually expensive which is the data frame creation if I run this this faster
version of the code the whole thing took takes 20 milliseconds okay as opposed to
400 and that's again that's that's we can do this because we know we know what
that but the actual slow parts of the code are and that's that's what the
profiling tools give us information about okay so those are my two examples
and and as you can see I've been using profits with our studio and I believe
this still requires a recent daily build of our studio which you can find if you
just google for it our studio daily build and our studio has some other nice
integration features which I want to show you so first is that there is a
profiling menu so I've been running all of this stuff by you know wrapping these
call all my code in profits but you don't have to do it that way if you're
using our studio so what you can do is you can say select your all of your code
that you want to run this is again this is not wrapped in profits this is like
if you're running your this is your you know your code in your whatever our file
you're working on you can say profile and then profile selected lines this
takes a few seconds and then it shows up here like that so you don't have to you
don't have to modify the code and add profits in there anywhere and once you
have it like this and you want to see if you want to save it for later you can
just click on the save button here and let's just say call this temp so let's
save it as temp dot our profits it's if I close that and then I find it the file
here so it's temp dot our profits and if I don't click on it it'll open it up
again here and also it turns out that if you want to share this with people
there's a couple ways of doing it if you can actually what you can do is this our
profits file is actually it is really just an HTML file so if I if I rename it
to temp HTML and double click on it it opens it up in a web browser and and I
can interact with it the same way that I was interacting with it before okay
because it lives just a web page so that's so that's one way of sharing it
is that you can save it as an HTML file and send it to somebody but you can also
there's a publish button here and if you hit that you can publish it to our pubs
so and if you're not familiar with our pubs it's just a free hosting service
that that our studio runs for for documents so I'll just publish it and
I'll say this a profit is example continue and then it's online at this
URL here so then you can share this URL with people and you can you know if you
were trying to if you want to show them how the profiling of your code and and
you know what's fast and slow you can just send them that URL so that's it's a
nice convenient way of doing it okay and one other thing I want to show you is
that you can also do that's previously I selected my code and I ran profile
profile selected lines another way that you can do it is you can say profile
start profiling and then run your line then run your code so well I guess I
only have to run this one here so I started profiling then I ran that line
of code and it's still profiling but then if I hit stop it stops and then it
pops up the information here but this you when you do it this way you don't
get the source code showing up here so that's it's it's not quite as nice that
way you don't you don't get to explore your the code that you are running okay
oh yes and it's awesome as I mentioned before you can use profits without our
studio you know if you're using our in the terminal or our GUI or say are from
emacs and you run process it will open it up in a separate web browser instead
of instead of popping it up in that in the R studio panel like I was like I was
working with there
okay and alright so that pretty much wraps things up so some things to
remember hopefully from this you've learned how the sampling profiler works
and you've got a feel for the profits interface and and also we've learned
that sometimes the performance bottlenecks are counterintuitive and
it's really useful to have visualizations tools like profits in
order to help you know figure out what those bottlenecks are so that you can
fix them now if you go to the the website for the package it's our studio
github.io slash profits there's a lot more information there's a lot of
details that have glossed over in this talk and if you're curious about those
here's about learning more about it you can visit the website there okay and I
think I can take some questions now so first question is I run code of our
cluster is there a way to pull the profile result to local I I don't think
that the profiler will give appropriate information if you're running code on a
cluster or you know in a distributed system so I don't think unfortunately the
the profile records the information that's necessary in order to to give you
that the information that you want there
let's see there's another one do you have to define the functions in the
profits call or can you just call the function that's that's a really good
question so in my examples I was defining the function inside of the
profits call and what that gives you is that when you do it that way you can
view the code in the code viewer if the code is if the function is defined
outside of the out of the profits call then you won't be able to won't be able
to see it in the code viewer so that's what that gives you now there are ways
of loading if you're say developing a package and you want to load a package
that you can see all the source in the package there's ways of doing it which
are in the website but but generally speaking it's it's best to run all the
functions in profits so that you can you can explore them okay when I tried
profits the spring in our studio on a Linux machine it did not work it only
worked in Windows our studio any progress that is surprising to me so I
it should work in our studio in Linux and if it doesn't that that's a bug so
now it's possible that if you had an old version of our studio it might not have
come up in our studio if that if that was the issue but profits itself should
work fine across all our platforms okay how will this work with shiny that is a
really good question um why don't I try to find an example here okay
you
oops sorry it's our studio okay so I have an example here of a shiny
application and I can I can run it interactively too but on this website
there's an example about profiling a shiny application actually I'll just run
this code since it's right there
see my studio okay so I'm just using run example to run one of the built-in
shiny examples no very shiny let's do that okay so this is our tab sets
example the slider on a few times summary okay and then when I close the
shiny app
profit as well you know that it's finished you know process the data takes
a little time to process it okay now here we go let me pop this out so it's
a little bit larger
okay so this is the shiny app there's a so the whole thing was within this run
example which then called run app and the important things to look at are this
these outputs here is this so this is blue or well I guess it's might be hard
to tell it's a it's actually a light blue output dollar plot here and you
notice I moved that slider a bunch of times and so every time it calls output
dollar every time I move that slider it would re-render this plot and so this
gives you a view of like what's taking time and I happen to have installed
shiny in the way that it displays all the source code for shiny here so you
can actually look at this rule this it's showing me all the internals for shiny
when I when I mouse over it which is that's actually the reason that this is
a little bit the inner interactions are a little bit slow here so I'll put dollar
plot calls a bunch of stuff you know and then it called end up calling hist which
was in the in the example and I call plot you know and so on and so on zoom
in and get a little bit better look at this but this gives you an idea of like
what's you know what takes time in the shiny application now this is a you'll
probably notice that well you'll notice that the the call stack is significantly
deeper than in those simple examples that I showed earlier but it's actually
far more complicated than that there's this high to internal function calls
checkbox here and you split it
you
okay so it's I have it split vertically instead of horizontal yeah instead of
horizontally so this is actually the full complexity of what's happening in
in shiny and you can see there's just you know there's a lot of there's a lot
of function calls and so we you know normally we try to hide all that
unnecessary information by using hide function calls and so you get you see
something like this that's all it's a little bit easier to interpret and again
now this is also in the if you go to the the website for profits there's it has a
same example and and on the website there's all this all these things are
interactive as well so that because because they are profits just as
generates web pages so it they can be embedded
into our markdown documents which is how this is all generated so I hope that
that's helpful that gives some understanding of using it with shiny
okay let's see so here's a question I don't see the profile item in the top
command list it says I'm running with the current version of our studio do I
need to use the daily update so a daily update of our studio so I'm using our
studio about our studio this is version 099 1281 these daily these daily updates
there's like sort of the release version of our studio and then there's these
daily builds the release versions will say they're up-to-date but if you want
all the cutting-edge featured all the cutting-edge features then you want to
use the daily builds so we can just you know say our studio daily and and then
it'll come up here our studio daily builds I'm on a Mac so I'd say desktop
Mac and then they're just right here so I would just download and install this
okay here's here's a question we discussed why 2,000 megabytes is
allocated but only 903 was deallocated did the resulting new data frame need
one gigabyte of storage and that was that was back with the it was this
example here so what happened was it allocated a lot of memory while it was
taking these means it didn't deallocate it all because as you can see during
this processing there was a garbage collection event that happened part way
through but at the end there wasn't another garbage collection event if
there was another garbage collection event here then I believe the total
memory used would have been it would have deallocated the same amount that it
had allocated well not exactly because it's still needed to allocate some
memory for the means but that's a that's relatively small so and there's ways of
triggering the garbage collection you can there's a function called GC which
will just trigger garbage collection so if I had done that at the end it would
probably come up that way
all right so here's another question why is matrix sizing a data frame so
computationally expensive it's it's actually not computationally expensive
it's it's just takes a lot of memory it uses it takes requires a lot of memory
allocation and and moving stuff around memory that's the expensive part in fact
a lot of times in our when when you have things that are that take a lot of time
but they're surprisingly you know they're things that are slow in our but
are surprisingly slow it's often because they're moving a lot of memory around in
a way that's inefficient so some of this stuff that I did here you know
using instead of convert to a matrix and then transposing with a perm which is
what apply does just using L apply directly that that saves time because it
didn't it didn't have to move stuff around in memory a lot
okay another question here can I save the profile file within our code so
instead of using the other RStudio interface and it is possible so if you
want to be able to share this with people without you know outside of our
studio or doing a programmatic way you can do it so there's a frequently asked
questions section of profits and it is
you
how do I share there it is okay so you just run prof is save that save that in
verbal P and you say HTML widgets colon colon save widget and then and then set
the file name that's that's how you'd save it without using without using the
RStudio graphical interface okay this is a really good one in the flame graph do
blank the blank spaces correspond to C++ code a CRC plus plus code being
executed or time that you aren't clicking on anything in the shiny site
so let's see so where is that last
okay so in this example so the blank spaces so I think I well if it's these
blank spaces this means that there's or at the very top above everything else
but that's time that is spent probably in C code there's spaces between these
you know this this sort of empty space between things this is just because in
these areas the call stack is not as deep there weren't as many function calls
so that's why there's nothing in between them now there are these cells that are
white there are cells in the flame graph that are yellow and there's ones that
are white the yellow ones are ones for which we have source refs and that means
that we can show that we can show you the source code in the in the code panel
on the left so that was the code for this shiny application and for shiny
itself because as I mentioned I had loaded shiny with with all the source
the source refs and so that I can view them all I can view all the shiny code
in that code panel the white stuff these are we did for these this is calling code
that we don't have source refs for so these are for packages that we don't
have what's called source refs installed and that's this is a these are probably
in the base or yeah that these functions are probably in the base package and
those are not installed with source refs by default in R so we just don't have
them there's ways to do it so you can install you can install it these
packages with source refs but I haven't done that okay okay how do you install
shiny to show internal functions great okay we were just talking about this so
again this is in the frequently asked questions sections of the website let's
see how do we get code from an R package to show in the code panel so there's
this question here and you need to install the package with source refs so
we basically typically well you'd say install packages in the package name
type equals source and then you could pass it this install option with keep
source and so any package that you install that way the internals of that
package will will show in the the code panel of profits
does coding simpler but nested functions worse in memory usage I mean is it a
good practice to define a function inside of another function that will
call it you know defining functions within other functions in R has a very
very low memory overhead and and also memory and time overhead so that's
actually it's pretty much there's very little cost to doing that and if you
define functions within functions and it can often help like just to mentally
sort out your code so I you know if you have a place where you're thinking about
doing that it's it's probably a good idea but that but there's no there's
probably no real performance benefit or or penalty for doing that okay here's
another one will process works with code being run in parallel say with a
parallel package and I believe the answer is no I haven't really tried this
out myself I think somebody told me that it did not work and that's because the
built-in our profiler doesn't record information for with parallel that that
can be useful it doesn't record the information that you need when you're
profiling using parallel